The Germans almost sank a terminal
quantity of British trade. It's close
because Britain is dependent not only on
oil imports but about half of its food
supply. Malta Cree and the Suez Canal
lie in the center of Italian ambitions.
The Britains are in a world of hurt.
Fall of Norway, fall of France, blockade
of Malta, fall of Cree. It is really bad
news. Germany should have bought a
completely different navy. skip the
surface fleet, buy a lot more yubot.
Maybe they would have zapped the British
before the United States gets its act
together in either World War. If Hillary
had just done the unloo and maybe done
the Sudetan number in Czechoslovakia and
quit, he'd be called Bismar II a genius.
But that's not who he is.
It turns out that the possibilities for
maritime and continental powers are a
little different. Basically, a small
subset of countries can defend
themselves primarily at sea and that
opens certain possibilities and others
can't and that opens and closes certain
possibilities. And I'm going to talk at
this uh story from Britain's point of
view, the country with the 360 you can't
get me mode. And it's an an instructive
case for the United States of the
possibilities and the perils of having
this sort of uh position. So that is my
game plan today. And you can look at the
great peninsula of Europe where Britain
is located. And you can see this
northern coastline for Britain where
it's uncomfortably close to the
continent and its enemies are sitting
there. It's an an interesting
neighborhood. So here's my plan. I'm
going to talk about talk about these
continental problems that Britain has
been dealing with. If you think about
it, Britain was always fighting France
and then in 1871, Germany reun uh
unifies and then the problems Germany
and I'm going to pick up the story in
1939 when things are really bad for
Britain. So I'm going to talk about
first these continental problems and
then I'm going to talk about how Britain
tried to deal with it and first it has
to do with getting sea control and then
once you can do that finding some
peripheral theaters where you might be
able to fight and deal with the
continental problem and you probably
need allies and so that those are the
first uh the first four topics then so
that was then and now is now the
continental problems now are China and
Russia and to see of what this case
study might reveal about the ongoing
things. All right, so here's Britain
uncomfortably close to the continent. If
it wants to get to Russia, which is his
big ally in World War I and World War
II, it's either got to go way up north
around the Norwegian coastline and you
get up into places like Morman and
Archangel, or it's got to go way around
through this very narrow sea, the
Mediterranean, through the choke point
of choke points, which is the Dardell's
and the Boserus into the Black Sea. And
the main port back in the day was
Odessa. And then if you compare French
and British access to the high seas,
France has got a pretty good coastline
that just gets it right into the oceans.
But Germany, if it wants to send
merchant traffic or naval traffic, it's
got to go through these narrow seas. And
then it's got to get by Britain, which
is its big enemy in the two world wars,
which is the dominant naval power. So
that's complicated for Britain. If it
wants to get to its empire back in the
day, it wants to go through the Suez
Canal,
that requires the cooperation of Spain,
France, Italy, and if it wants to get to
Russia, Turkey as well. Well, Turkey
didn't cooperate very well in either
war. And if you think in World War II,
well, fall of France, fascist sympathies
of Spain, and then Italy is part of the
access. Britain is in real trouble. And
what do you do about this? Britain has
this big empire that it wants to
protect. It's got a massive basing
system, more bases than anybody else
does in order to protect this empire
from this, which is a very resentful
Germany. Doesn't much like the
Versailles settlement of World War I.
It's a divided country in that a Polish
corridor separates East Prussia. And the
Germans start trying to solve this
problem. Initially they're taking
Austria, the Sudet and German parts of
Czechoslovakia in 38. Then they take all
of Czechoslovakia in 39 and they've
already dealt with the Rin land which
supposed to be demilitarized per the
terms of the Versail treaty. Well, they
ignore that remilitarized in 36. And
this is important because there are a
lot of industrial uh resources and
factories and things there. It turns out
that Hitler's plans require it's not
optional. It requires the resources not
only of the Rhineland but also
Czechoslovakia and Poland and Romania
which is going to have the oil for them.
So when you get to 39 when Russia and
Germany are dividing up Poland between
them, this is the part of the history
that Russians don't like to talk about,
but it's exactly what they were doing.
This triggers World War II because the
French and the British honor their
alliance with the Poles to help deal
with this. All right. So, in 1940,
Britain's in a world of hurt. It faces
this massive blue problem. And then
there's this green growing green
disaster. It's facing two continental
powers, Germany and Russia that are both
have these expansive empires they want
to create. They want to divide Europe
and then the rest of the world. Bad news
for Britain. So, but 1941 when Hitler
decides he needs Russia too. And then
Russia decides, ah, the one that's
attacking me is probably the major
problem, not the other one. So Stalin is
going to swap sides and he's going to be
be coordinating with Britain. So that's
better from Britain's point of view than
having two continental powers trying to
deal with it. So now it's down to one.
So once the United States has gotten
into the war, this is what the world
looks like. You have a big cancer in
Europe from the British point of view,
but it's all surrounded by oceans that
Britain can get to and a lot of allies
and neutral states. So Britain has
access to those places. And then there's
a separate cancer in Asia where Japan's
trying to work its magic. And I say
separate because the axis never
coordinated these two theaters. So this
is looking at the world from a maritime
perspective. What you're looking at is
all the oceanic roots that connect
everything. So Britain's problem is how
to leverage the miracle of sea transport
that basically can access you the whole
world versus the logistical nightmare of
land transport where you have to you can
only drive through countries that'll let
you drive through. The seas give you
mobility. They give you access to
theaters, markets, resources, allies,
and they also give you sanctuary at home
if you're surrounded by them. It makes
it harder for people to invade. So,
Britain's trying to leverage all of that
against the armies uh of the continental
armies by um it's going to try to
strangle them economically,
diplomatically, and militarily. Now, the
generation that led World War II in
Britain, and not just Britain, but
elsewhere, they were the conscripts of
World War I, which was supposed to end
all wars, and they knew full well is in
the midst of World War II that it did
not remotely achieve that promise. And
so, they learned a whole series of
lessons, and I'm going to do a
comparison of what was done in World War
I versus World War II. And they are the
greatest generation, not their children
who claimed the title. Lesson number one
is don't go beyond the culminating point
of attack. What's that? The terminology
comes from Clausowitz uh Carlan Klausitz
who is the western guru on conventional
land warfare which means is if you're
attacking in a battle if you go too far
you will weaken yourself because the
enemy will counterattack send you
further backwards than you would have
otherwise. In the case of World War I
you're sending young men over trenches
into ongoing machine gun fire. What do
you suppose is going to happen to them?
And this proflegate waste of life in
these uh assaults out of trenches. Maybe
you took a little territory in the first
two weeks, but after that nothing. These
offenses will go on for months and
months, racking up hundreds of thousands
of deaths. Uh no more doing that in
World War II. And you can look the death
figures for World War I and two. So in
World War I, the British army gets the
multi-millionman army that they had
coveted. They deploy it on the main
front from start to finish and they
chalk up twice as many deaths as they
did in World War II when they have a
peripheral strategy. Uh in World War II
they do make the mistake is they land
the big army on the continent opening
move but it doesn't do well and then
they reassess and they get that army off
the continent immediately. This is what
the Dunkirk evacuation is where the
French are covering the British as
they're decamping from the continent
saving the British army. And this is why
France has such large casualties. It is
it is doing this even though France is
in the in the war that long. So, it's
going to be a long wait before the
British get back on the continent again.
Long wait also for the United States to
get in the war. There's no more going
beyond the culminating uh point of
attack. All right. The the way diplomacy
is run is also completely different. In
World War I, there are exactly two
conferences trying to coordinate things
among the antant powers and they're the
December 1915 and November 1916 Shanti
conferences. And all they are are the
military heads. Well, the Russian
Romanov dynasty is overthrown in early
1917. It is too late. What happened in
World War I is the Germans focused on
the Western Front in 1914, Eastern Front
1915, back to the Western Front in 1916.
Well, in World World War II, the idea is
you want to squeeze them simultaneously
from all fronts so they can't can't
divert people back and forth. And if you
look at the coordination, it begins even
before the United States is in the war
with the ABC staff talks and then the
Atlantic uh conference which yields the
Atlantic charter which is talking about
what war objectives are unconditional
surrender of uh Germany and also what
the post-war situation is going to look
like. And there's coordination not only
among military leaders but uh civil and
military leaders as well. There's a
combined command of US and British
forces. We have offices in each other's
capitals, but we're also coordinating
with the Russians. So that you're
setting up not only uh also war
termination and what what post-war
institutions are going to be like to
hold the peace. It's a completely
different event from World War I when
Russia falls out of the ant because
there are bread riots in St. Petersburg
and Russia could not supply its troops
with adequate armaments. Well, that's
not going to happen in World War II.
Russia comes with a really large army.
Germany has another large army. You've
got to have a big army to deal with
Germany's army. So, in World War I,
there is no Len league. No one would
have thought of giving that much stuff
to each other. It's like everybody first
and it's like, okay, everybody last
doing that one. The railways had not
been completed in World War I. The Trans
Siberian doesn't get completed until
1916. And the Merman railway, you can
see Merman up there, isn't completed
until early 1917. The Romanov dynasty is
gone. It's too late. In World War II, 34
of Lenley's aid would go over those
completed railway systems. Now, to the
British credit, they did try to break
the blockade on Russia. The way to get
into Russia in those days and hook in
with a railway system would be to get
into the Black Sea in Odessa because
Russia had all the men but they didn't
have all the war material to fight. So
this is where the Galipoly campaign
comes in. You can argue about whether
you think it is good strategy or not,
but it was miserably executed. So first
of all, it wasn't a joint operation.
What's joint? Joint means you're
coordinating your different military
services. In this case, army and navy.
So, what goes on? The British Navy tries
to run the dinels for two months. That
does not work well. Do you suppose the
Ottomans might think something was up?
Yeah. And when you get up there on the
Dells, all the high point, it's a very
steep place. So, the the Ottomans are
all busy sorting that all out, getting
troops in place. So two months later
when the the British, New Zealand,
Australian, and French troops all land
on a given day, the Ottomans are there
with the welcome party essentially. And
and that invasion stalemates in three
days, but they keep at it for 8 months,
taking 190,000 casualties, 55,000 of
whom are dead men. Uh totally, uh
miserably executed. And it comes with
collateral damage as the British are
trying to run the dinels with their
navy. This is when the Ottomans are
terrified of their Christian subjects,
Armenians, and they're starting to round
them up. They're pulling them out of the
army. And then days before the landing,
the the Turkish massacre of the
Armenians begin. And between 1915 and
1923, 1.5 million Armenians are killed.
That's a lot of collateral damage. All
right. The Normandy landings are a
completely different event in World War
II. This is another uh contested landing
of trying to get armies in. First of
all, the buildup of war material goes on
for years to get all the landing vessels
in, the equipment, the forces all ready
to go in Britain. And then the
disinformation campaign kept the Germans
completely disinformed. They were
expecting the landing to be at the
Pakala, which is the shortest place, and
it's way off in Normandy. that worked.
So, everybody lands on a day and they're
up and over and into places inland.
Another lesson learned, the Royal Navy
did not think that convoy duty was the
manly thing to do. Uh they would convoy
troop transports, but they wouldn't deal
with the merchant marine until 1918.
Well, they the Germans almost sank a
terminal quantity of that stuff. So, the
Navy is not thinking about the economic
dimensions of warfare. They're just
focused on all the military things in
World War I. In World War II, the
British would be convoying even before
they got in the war. Another difference
of the between the World War II and
World War I. At the end of World War I,
if you look at the disposition of German
troops, they're abroad. They're
occupying Belgium, Luxembourg, parts of
France. Nobody's in Germany. Yes, the
Germans had really lousy meals during
the war, but German civilians did not
feel the full brunt of what their go
government had done. And therefore, uh,
Prime Minister Winston Churchill and
President Franklin Roosevelt felt that
it was really critical to have boots on
the ground in Berlin to let the Germans
know exactly what had happened to them
and let them feel the war that they had
inflicted on others in order to end it.
Even so, the the allies win this thing
and they wreck the continental powers,
but they almost wreck themselves in the
process. It's a peric victory for France
and Britain. It really weakens them. So,
World War II is going to be a different
event. So, that's the being in this
continental situation, the lessons
learned from the last time around. And
now for what the uh British did in World
War II to deal with the continental
problem. The opening move of a maritime
power in a really high stakes war like
this uh is typically blockade. What you
want to do is cut your enemy off from
the oceans and force it to cannibalize
its own resources and those of occupied
areas. And because of the geographic
position of a maritime power, you can
quite often do this to a continental
power on narrow seas. And Britain's were
well aware that Germanyy's a trading
country. Most of it trade goes by sea
and it's also on these narrow seas. So
geographically and economically it's
really vulnerable to blockade. And I get
it. Germany gets alternate resources.
But they come in at a much higher cost.
They're much more difficult and so that
you're really putting a stress on the
German economy and causing inflation and
other things. But if you blockade, um, a
continental power can't blockade you
back. Why? They're on the narrow seas,
so they can't deploy a surface fleet.
You'll sink it. And also, um, they can't
easily blockade a coastline that faces
the open seas, the high seas.
You can do other things on narrow seas,
but it's pretty tough. So, what do you
do if you cannot blockade ships in port?
Well, then what you're going to try to
do is commerce rating to try and uh sink
things when they're out and about. And
that was what Germany did in World War
II and why its occupation of France was
so important because once it took the
French coastline, it then set up yubot
pens in breast Laurel San La and
Bordeaux and they're going to be using
these to fight the battle of the
Atlantic. That's the game. So maritime
powers do blockade. The response of um
continental power is commerce rating and
then the maritime uh response to that is
going to be you're going to convoy your
merchant ships. Okay. As the war begins
in Europe, the United States is not in
but Roosevelt is coordinating with Latin
America to set up a big neutrality zone
all around the Americas 300 nautical
miles. And then the Len least act also
before US belligerency. There's pieces
of it which say the United States is
going to take over British bases in
Iceland and set up bases in Greenland.
Why do we care about those locations?
They're really important if you're going
to send convoys back and forth across
the Atlantic both to attack and to
defend. So that's what we're up to. But
even so, uh the Axis visits a real
nightmare in the Battle of the Atlantic.
A lot of things are going down. So how
does that all work? So before the United
States gets in at the very beginning,
these Ubot turn the North Sea into a
kill zone. And then Britain is losing an
awful lot of stuff off its shores and
also off the shores of Africa. And the
Germans get really good at commerce
rating really fast. And there's also the
fall of France, which is a mess because
prior to the fall of France, Britain is
only convoying just beyond Ireland. Once
you get the fall of France and all of
those submarines on French territory,
then the British have to convoy 400
miles further west and they've lost an
awful lot of destroyers between the fall
of Norway and then the Dunkerk
evacuation. So, they haven't got enough
ships to convoy properly. And then the
Germans are really creative. Admiral
Dennit, who runs the submarine service
at this point, he uses Wolfpack tactics
where you concentrate a whole bunch of
submarines on a convoy, tack it at
night, and bad things happen to the
convoy. Also, the Germans have captured
some of the British code, so they have a
sense of where the convoys are, and
they're sinking almost a terminal
tonnage of this traffic. 850,000 tons of
Allied shipping is going down. So, this
is Hitler's happy time when he's
thinking an awful lot of stuff. Um, then
there's a big Greenland gap. This is
where there's a lack of air cover and so
you'll see a lot of things are going
down in this Greenland gap. But
meanwhile, the British have gotten
pretty good at espionage and they've
captured a lot of Enigma machines. Those
are what the Germans are using to
encrypt their messages. Well, the
British capture some machines, some
rotors, some code books in 1940 and 41.
So by the summer of 1941 through
February 42, they can actually read the
codes or some of them decrypt them. So
that within 36 hours, they can get the
information out. And this allows convoys
go, "Oh, Wolfpack there. We're going to
do evasive routing of the convoys
somewhere else." And that may have saved
up to 2 million tons of Allied shipping.
Uh but meanwhile
for the Germans, General Raml is in
North Africa and he's having troubles
because he's supplied across the
Mediterranean and the British and
friends are sinking too many of the uh
his supplies. So Admiral Dennit is told
to reroute some of the Ubot in the
Atlantic to go help General Raml up in
North Africa. The United States isn't in
the war, so all quiet on the uh on the
eastern seabboard. So it it it's looking
like it might be okay for the British
for a while except Dunads thinks
something's up. And so they add a fourth
rotor to the Enigma machine. And so the
British are then blind again for most of
1942 until they can capture a four rotor
enigma machine. All the rotors plus the
codebooks. It takes a while. So they're
in a world of hurt. The United States
enters the war, which you think would be
good for Britain, except it produces
Hitler's second happy time. Why? Because
Admiral King, like his Royal Navy
predecessors in the previous war,
doesn't think convoying is the manly
thing for naval uh officers to be up to.
So, he's not for convoying. Also,
Americans don't turn off the lights. And
therefore, as merchant ships are going
up the east coast of the United States,
the lighting is just highlighting their
silhouettes, making them much uh easier
to sink. And oh, by the way, in those
days, Louisiana, Texas oil, which is
supplying the east coast, where a lot of
American industry is, is coming up by
ships on the eastern seabboard and
particularly by Cape Hatteris Scholes,
which are like 30 m wide become a total
kill zone. So, uh, Admiral King rethinks
it after losing more than a million tons
of tonnage in the first three months of
42 and goes, "Oh, gee whiz, maybe we
should do convoys." Yes. And, uh, the
United States does interlocking convoy
system by May of 1942. But then, Donuts
just starts hunting things a little
further south in the Caribbean.
So, um, the Brits, uh, get their four
rotor enigma machine and they're able to
decode things again. But there's another
problem. The British think that there's
something up with their Admiral codes
and in August of uh, 42, but they don't
change them out till June of 43. There
was something wrong. The Germans were
reading them. So um uh it's this you can
see this back and forth in the battle of
the Atlantic but eventually the air
cover gap is closed. This makes a
tremendous difference. There are new
technologies that are introduced that
ruin Admiral Dunuts. Here was what
happens. The United States had radar.
Germans never did. American radar
improves so you can see through the fog.
Uh the United States adds hedgehogs.
What are they? Not the cute little
critters. It's rather if you have a ship
and you have hedgehogs, they deliver an
elliptical spray of depth charges. So,
anybody who's anywhere underneath you is
in a world of hurt. In addition, the
United States introduces two new classes
of ships. One auxiliary aircraft
carriers, little ones. That means you're
going to have air cover for the entire
journey, right? When the when you get
beyond land-based air, then these folks
will take over. In addition, uh small
destroyer escorts were introduced
instead of the big ones. And these
little ships, they had all sorts of fun
things on board. Sonar, radar, depth
charges, hedgehogs. And so they
transform commerce rating into a low
life expectancy profession. So that in
May of 43, the Germans lose 41 hubot.
That's unsustainable. That's a massive
percentage of what they have. And in one
of those encounters, I think it's about
25 Ubot going after a convoy of 37
ships. sink nothing, lose three Ubot
plus another one damaged. And on one of
these Ubot is Admiral Dunut's
19-year-old son Peter who dies in all of
this. So Dunets as a result uh redeploys
the Ubot out of the North Atlantic
because it's unsustainable for Germany
south of the Azors.
And um and yet there are problems going
on with the Arctic convoy that takes a
quarter of the Lenley's aid to Stalin
and it gets called off for much of 42
and much of 43 and I'll get into it but
that problem gets solved and then you
can see where all the kills are and
their Germans are losing uh Ubot closer
and closer to home shores. So the battle
of the Atlantic is won by the allies in
part by reducing merchant man losses
through um convoys, evasive convoys and
also increasing uh yubot losses through
all these different technologies and
also u reading their mail which helps to
find them. But one could argue even more
important was the civilian side of it.
the United States's ability to just
overwhelm Germany with the construction
of US naval and merchant men. Here are
the stats. Look what happens with naval
strength. 43 US Navy hulls and personnel
are uh tripling. That's quite a lot. And
then naval hulls are going to double in
the next year. That's a lot of ships and
a lot of people in the Navy. Here's some
more fun statistics. So if you look at
1941 and go over, that's a bumper year
for Ubot construction. 1941
going to 1942, really ugly if you're a
merchant ran uh crew member cuz it's
double the number of tonnage of merchant
ships that are being sunk. But then keep
moving over. Look at merchant hull
construction up by four times. And the
next year that's going to double. And
oh, let's look over for uh 1943. Look
how many Ubot are being sunk. It goes
way up with all those new technologies
that I've just told you about. So even
though the Germans produce a lot more
yubot, the kill rate is so high that
there's hardly any net gain. And then
here's some more way fun ways of looking
at it. So you look at new ships. As soon
as the United States gets in the war,
new ship rates go up up and away. But
the losses are really high through mid
1943. And then it's it's in uh mid 1943
that you can see the big divergence
between construction and what's being
destroyed. And the Germans just can't
keep up with this. Uh there is just way
too much stuff out there for them to
sink. All right. So Admiral Dunit did
get one thing right. His boss there,
Admiral Rider, who's the head of the
Navy, had said that pocket battleships
were the thing to use for commerce
rating. And Dunets proves him wrong with
that are the way to go. And Hitler
agrees. So he cashiers Raider, makes
donuts ahead of the um uh the Navy and
then Stitler goes one step further. He
scraps his surface fleet because it's
useless to him in this war. You cannot
deploy it in this kind of high stakes
war. Something that countries like China
with surrounded by narrow seas ought to
think about. All right. So if you look
at why the battle of the Atlantic turned
out the way it did is Germany and
Britain have very different geographies
and arguably Germany bought the wrong
navy before the war. It should have
bought a lot of Ubot and forget the
surface minimize the surface boats that
you're buying. And uh so Britain could
do things that Germany just plain
couldn't. That's just part of the
geography. So and the the effects of the
blockade were really significant. you're
really straining the German economy and
but the German commerce rating was also
very effective. The Germans almost sank
a terminal quantity of British trade.
It's close because Britain is dependent
not only on oil imports resources but
about about half of its food supply. So
the Germans tried and came close and
then you go well the counter commerce
rating strategy did work but it was very
there was touchandgo back and forth and
it required a lot of things that had to
be coordinated. You needed the
intelligence. It really helps reading
other people's mail. You needed a whole
set of new ship classes. You need to um
be able to construct adequate quantities
of uh naval hulls, merchant hulls. uh
you need to coordinate with allies. You
got to get food and other things to
Britain. There are a lot of things going
on here. You need air cover the planes
that are capable of doing it. So there
are a lot of things going on. Remove any
one of them and the outcome may have
been different. If you're developing
frontier models, you know that
highquality data sets the ceiling on
performance. Labelbox is the rare data
partner that works handinhand with
researchers throughout their entire
process. Not only will they get you the
data that you need, they'll also help
you figure out what data is needed to
make your research ideas work in the
first place. To give you an example,
I've talked before about why I think
that fully automated computer use will
be difficult. You have to build
thousands of environments where language
models can practice long horizon
problems using common pieces of
software. Labelbox is already building
these environments for leading Frontier
Labs. They know how to resist reward
hacking and structure problems at just
the right level of difficulty to push
models beyond their current limits. They
also help you track model performance so
you can always know how your model is
learning and also where it still needs
work. Labelbox delivers highquality
frontier data regardless of domain
modality or training paradigm. It
doesn't matter if you need RL
environments for agents, audio for
multi-turn voice, action data for
robotics or problem sets for physics.
Labelbox can get you the best data and
fast. Learn more at labelbox.comvarcesh.
All right, back to Sarah. All right, so
that's uh it on the commerce rating. So
once you command the Atlantic or which
means that uh the uh a sustainable
amount of of traffic is going to get
through from the Allied powers, then you
can start thinking about peripheral
theaters. Okay. What's a peripheral
theater? The main theater is Russia in
this war. Not what you think. Why?
Because between 2/3 and 3/4 of German
ground forces were always fighting
Russia. That means these other theaters
which are peripheral to the main theater
take up between one quarter to uh
onethird of German forces. That makes
them peripheral. doesn't make them
unimportant, but they're not the main
theater. And by the way, who would want
to fight on the main theater if there
are alternatives? People die on droves
in the main theater. So this man, Sir
Julian Corbett, very fine naval theorist
of Britain, who was heartbroken in World
War I that Britain ignored his naval
strategy, which was don't do the
continental commitment and run the war
through these peripheral operations. And
uh it wrecked his health. But here's
what according to Corbett are the
prerequisites for a theater that makes a
really good one for a peripheral
operation. One, it has to be overseas so
the enemy can't invade you or wreck your
um productive base. Secondly, you need
local siege control to get in there. But
that local sea access has got to be
better than the land access because you
want to have it easier for Britain to
get in and out than it is for the enemy
because then attrition rates will favor
uh Britain. Britain also should deploy a
disposal force. What's that? It means
those forces you have who are in excess
of what's necessary for homeland
defense. It's not disposable force. It's
rather a force that if everything goes
south, you won't ruin the homeland, but
you can afford to risk it on potentially
very risky but potentially warchanging
operations. In addition, they got to be
joint operations. Joint means
cooperation of land and sea in this era.
And in order, you're going to come in by
sea, you're going to supply by sea, but
you'll be fighting on land. You better
coordinate all that. And it's got to be
combined operations. What does that
mean? Coordinating with allies. You need
friendly locals who are going to help
you do all of this. And then you need to
command your own forces. Why? Because
you want to determine how they come in,
how they go out. If you if it all goes
badly, you want to be able to leave,
which is what they did at Dunkirk. As
much as a continental power might want
to play this game, they cannot because
they don't have the act the requisite
sea access to pull it off. All right.
The war winds up with Britain uh and the
United States going through four phases.
Well, Britain all four some of the later
ones of four peripheral theaters. First,
the North Sea that's essential for
British homeland defense. And there are
three keys to the North Sea. Scappa flow
straight of do coast of Norway. Britain
always controlled the straight of do and
Scappa flow. So Germany went after
Norway to try and open things up that
way and Norway is not an ideal
peripheral theater for Britain because
the Germans had better land and sea
access to that theater. They take Norway
and then they set up subbases at Ben and
Tronheim in addition to the ones they
had at Keel Hamburg and the Helgoland
archipelago and these are the things
that are ruining those Arctic convoys.
So that one does not go. So well for
Britain it's winds up facing an incre uh
a totally hostile uh continental Europe
shoreline the the axis has it all right
in the Mediterranean there are certain
keys that Britain controlled Gibralar
that's access to the Atlantic Suez Canal
access to the Red Sea cit that's access
to the Black Sea and then the British
had a fallback position a midway point
at Malta if things went really bad so
the Germans attacked the fallback
position because they're trying to
they're trying to bail out the Italians
and fighting in North Africa. And so
they're trying to take Malta because
whoever's got planes there can cause
convoys all kinds of problems or they
can protect their own things. And so
Malta is blockaded by the Germans. It's
not relieved until uh the end of 1942.
So that is not great for Britain. it's
uh threatening uh well its access to the
empire and the problem for Britain is
Italian belligerency. Italians had been
part of the Anton in World War uh one.
Well, they're part of the Axis in World
War II. And three of these keys, Malta,
Cree, and the Suez Canal, lie in the
center of Italian ambitions because they
want an empire where they go down the
Balkan coast and then they're going to
go deep into Libya and Ethiopia to unify
their empire around the Red Sea. And so
Mussolini kicks this thing off. Except
then he gets stuck in Greece. And so the
Germans have to come and bail him out.
They chase the British out of Greece.
The Britain are then on Cree and then
that falls to the Germans. So the
Britain are in a a world of hurt. The
Suez Canal is under threat. Think about
it. Fall of Norway, fall of France,
blockade of Malta, fall of Cree. It is
really bad news.
However, when the United States gets
into the war, uh the United States can
help Britain retake some of these keys
to the Mediterranean.
And this is what is going on in North
Africa. So Admiral Dunit had saved it
initially, but after the United States
is in with more assets, Dunit's oil, the
tanker supplying his oil, 60% of them
are getting sunk because Malta holds and
Malta is supplied and these tankers are
getting bombed out of uh existence. And
so uh Raml loses in North Africa, not
because he's the inferior general, he's
a better general, he's just not
supplied. And this is the key. Um, and
once you take North Africa, that
peripheral operation, it opens the
opportunity to go into Sicily and then
the rest of Italy. And once you get that
going, there's a possibility to do the
Normandy landing. So, there's four
different peripheral operations. Some
would argue that the air campaign over
Germany was another peripheral campaign.
Uh, you're bringing the war home to
Germans. You're wrecking their
productive base. And also it's a major
help to the Russians. Why? Because once
the British start bombing Berlin, Hitler
calls off air squadrons from the Eastern
Front and these anti-aircraft guns can
be used against tanks or aircraft. He
pulls those back and that means the
Germans no longer own the skies of
Russia of Russia and you're no longer
going to be taking hundreds of thousands
of PS. Okay, so that's how the
peripheral strategies worked out, but
they're coordinated through allies,
figuring out how to make all of them
work. And here are the stats on allies.
Alliances are additive, right? You
should ideally add up all the
complimentary capabilities of you and
your friends and then share them, divvy
them out in an optimal way to deal with
things. Well, the Axis alliance was also
additive in the sense that the Germans
added to their GDP the GDPs of all the
places they occupied that pretty much
accounted for GDP growth in Germany
except
that whole um way of doing things
involves big occupation for forces which
are big overhead of these occurred
places and you've also damaged them in
the conquest whereas the allies are are
all game to help each other and also
when Germany took over continental
Europe, it's taking the big petroleum
deficit zone because Europe doesn't
produce petroleum. The North Sea oil,
those things hadn't been discovered in
those days. Yes, Romania has oil. Yes,
Hitler takes Romania, but Romanian
pipelines ran to pre-war customers, and
it's very difficult to find the manpower
and the steel to reroute all of your
pipelines in wartime. So, that's a whole
other part of uh Hitler's problems. So,
as you're putting together these
complimentary capabilities, the Russians
have a huge army. Most of the fighting
takes place between Russia and uh
Germany. The Russians wreck the German
army. You know, millions of Russians and
Germans are dying here. But if you look
at Operation Barbarosa, which is
Germany's initial invasion of the Soviet
Union, they suffer a nearly 30% casualty
rate. That's called catastrophic
success. You have too many successes
like that, it'll be catastrophic.
And um here's the mathematics of uh the
main front. Only two countries have
really big armies, Germany and Russia.
uh once the Germans take maximize their
territorial conquest, they've reduced
Russian population because they've
conquered all these areas to less than
that of the United States. Yet,
nevertheless, the Russians mobilized
twice the army that the United States
does. And if you look at the mathematics
of munitions, the Russians on their
lonesome produce more munitions than did
Germany. Once the United States gets in
the war, we produce a hundred billion
and whatever dollars it wasn't on
munitions. And in that period, the
Germans produced less than 40 billion.
So bad news for Germany and all of these
numbers. The trick is getting the
munitions to the men. Whereas in World
War I, that wasn't feasible. But now
these railway lines have been completed
and uh it's pouring in. And the lenade
you look at it. Wow. Wow, Britain's
getting a lot. Russia quite a bit, but
less. China, nothing. What's going on
there? You can only get aid in if there
are ports and railways.
Japan blockaded China. Proof of concept.
It can be done. The Japanese did it and
you could not get stuff in. So, what the
United States was trying to do, the
British thought we were insane. They're
probably correct. Uh, we were going to
we were flying things in over the
Himalayas called the hump. Great. So,
you're going to fly in the aviation fuel
to land. That's going to be the same
aviation fuel that's going to get you
back and however many other bombers that
you can deal with in China. It's not
workable. And Russia, even though it got
a lot less than Britain because it's not
getting ships, but it's getting equally
valuable useful things. For instance,
Russia produces a lot of planes, but it
doesn't produce didn't produce adequate
high octane aviation fuel. The United
States had loads of that. The United
States produced all kinds of vehicles,
all kinds of rolling stock, locomotives.
And this is what uh Russia used to
transport everything. And the United
States prevented Russia from going into
a famine in the winter of 4243. We fed
them. Uh and this spam in a cam, this is
hormels
contribution to the war. Everyone had so
much spam during the war. They never
It's canned pork. No one ever wanted to
see it again. But a little can of pork,
it it goes a long way. doesn't spoil in
a can. And this len lease aid goes a
quarter of it goes up through Merman. A
lot of it gets sunk up there and not
reliable. Quarter of it goes through
Persia and then half of it goes over the
Trans Siberian. And you go, well, what's
this Axis alliance about? Why aren't the
Japanese sinking any of this? Right? Uh,
talk about a dysfunctional alliance. All
right, so this is to tell you what
happened with those Arctic convoys. You
can see in 42 a tremendous number of
them were sunk and this is fully laden
ships with scarce war war material. So
we and the British called them off for
most of 42 and most of 43 and Stalin was
beside himself. And so in 43 he's
sending out feelers to Hitler trying to
do a separate piece. And luckily Hitler
was not interested. Uh Hitler wasn't
wasting his time with targeting empty
ships on the home voyage. He was only
going after the laden one. Okay. So,
what does all this Len lease aid
support? What does it add up to? Uh
well, in Barbarosa, you got 3 million
plus Russians going after 3 million
Germans. That's a lot of people to
supply and tie up. And as you watch that
go, the Axis is killing Russians or
making them PS by the millions. Uh, but
it's suffering 15% losses of its forces
and it's going to add up. So that when
you get to August 41, that's when the
siege of Lennengrad, St. Petersburg
begins. By December, the axis are within
25 miles of Moscow. It is not looking
good at all. But once the United States
is in the war, uh, you can start doing
peripheral theaters like in North
Africa. And then these casualties, while
they aren't as significant as what's
going on on the main front, it's
cumulative. So Stalenrad, the largest
battle of the wars going on, you got
North Africa and then when you have
Kursk, which is the largest setpiece
battle of the wars, big big tank battle,
uh, this is when Sicily is happening and
moving up the Italian peninsula. And you
can see the cumulative effects of these
sequential operations and adding up both
the main theater and the peripheral
theater. Uh so that when you get to
Normandy the it's the Russians are tying
up 228 access divisions. There are only
58 access divisions all in Europe,
Western Europe, Italy and everywhere. So
that's what makes Normandy possible is
the Russians really holding on to
things. But when you start looking at
the main front, the peripheral
operations in Italy and then Normandy
and then you have additional fronts in
France and then the Balkans, this
continental cancer is into remission
that the Germans just can't sustain it.
Okay, to summarize,
uh before Britain had allies in this
war, it was in a world of of hurt. It
was just losing one thing after another.
But once you get the big continental
buddy, don't dismiss the importance of a
big continental buddy that is in the
area where the fighting is taking place,
not separated by the seas, but there
with a big army. That was essential. And
then once the United States gets in with
its big productive base, then you can
really start doing things because if you
can command the seas, that's what the
battle of the Atlantic is about, then
you can connect the world and get the
connect allies, theaters, resources. So,
um, here are the operational effects of
these peripheral operations. You start
with one where you can. If you win
there, it'll open up a menu of more
promising locations. All the while
you're retriting your enemy's forces and
also if you're doing it right you're
relieving pressure on the main front for
Russia which is doing the heavy lifting.
The strategic effects if you can do this
successfully is you're going to control
resources for yourself deny them for
people you don't like and this will help
put time on your side. You're
strengthening your alliance system be
because you're essential to each other's
survival as you coordinate things and
you're dividing your enemy's attentions
among multiple theaters overextending
them. So you start by trying to contain
the problem and as things go on you try
to roll it back and then you go for
regime change. So you're producing
cumulative effects from these sequential
operations. So that's how it works. Um
Churchill, the great wit, uh talked
about the hassles of dealing with
allies, right? You're into these are
highstakes discussions. They don't
always go pleasantly, but his idea is
there's only one thing worse than
fighting with allies. That's fighting
without them because they'll be toast.
You need these complimentary
capabilities, different locations, and
coordinating it to gang up on your
continental problem. Also, if you stick
with it, you can help establish uh
precedents, laws, institutions that'll
hold the peace after the war. So, that's
his take. All right. So I've given you a
big exposition on um maritime solutions
to continental problems which are in a
global war which is blockade and then
countering their commerce rating
peripheral operations uh massive
production and then joint and combined
operations.
>> I've been wanting a custom research tool
that I can use to prep for upcoming
interviews. something that will
summarize papers that I need to read and
generate flashcards and suggest
questions that I can ask the guest. So,
I decided to try just building it myself
using Warp. And honestly, I just really
love the experience of working with it.
The way I would describe Warp is that
it's like clawed code but with a much
nicer UI. I got most of the application
working after just a one shot. And then
Warp made it really easy to iterate with
the agent to fix minor bugs and to
improve the UI. I can see exactly how
the edits were being made in the text
files themselves just by clicking the
expand icon. And if I needed to change a
variable or something, I could just do
it through the inline editor. The
navigation is way nicer than if it was a
native terminalbased tool. It's much
easier to scroll through everything and
understand all of the models actions.
It's exactly the right interface for
coding with agents. You can try Warp
today by going to warp.dev/barkcash.
And with the code duo, you can get the
Warp Pro plan for only $5. Okay, back to
Sarah. So that was then. How about now?
Okay, this is what NATO looks like. And
you can look at the United States with
our western and eastern coasts that are
unencumbered. You wouldn't be able to
blockade those. The two narrow seas are
the Sea of Labrador and the Caribbean.
But basically, hard to imagine that the
United States Navy wouldn't be able to
deploy in wartime with that. And same
thing true on the big peninsula of
Europe. Yeah, I get it. Uh Turkey may
not be able to deploy, but Spain,
France, and uh Norway, uh there there
are these unencumbered coastlines.
They'll probably get their navies out.
Eurasia is a completely different story.
This is where China and Russia live. No
one's done this to them. This is just
the way it is. It's all of these narrow
seas that become kill zones in wartime.
I've described it to you how it works.
And I get it. There's the Arctic up
there, but there's no economic activity
or population. So, uh, being able to run
things in the Arctic Arctic doesn't do
you very good. You do you very much
good. So, nature naturally contains both
Russia and China. It's just the way it
is. So, let's start with Putin here,
Vlad the Bad on his little Mongol pony,
a continental mode of transport. If you
live there, what can you get out of it?
It's a long horse ride if you're going
to do it that way. So, um, whom can he
blockade? Well,
he's got one aircraft carrier, the
Admiral Knuts off, which is been, um,
under repair since 2018. Long time to be
in the shop. It uh, it required the
largest um, dry dock that Russia has to
repair it. And then it flipped the dry
dock, which gashed the hull, and there's
been all sorts of charges of
embezzlement, various fires on board.
It's not getting repaired anytime fast
and it's just like an occupational
hazard problem. So, that one's not doing
him any good. He's got um Putin has got
two uh liquid playgrounds that he likes.
One's the Black Sea uh before he got
involved with Ukraine. In theory, he
could have blockaded I guess Bulgaria,
Romania, Ukraine, and Georgia if he
wanted to. That was why he's so
interested in the Kur Strait, which
would blockade the Sea of Azovv because
he wanted to take Ukraine from east to
west. That was part of the plan. Oh,
yeah. And he used to have or maybe still
does, unknown, one overseas base, Tartu,
Syria. Talk about a garden spot. And I
guess if you want to go bomb civilians,
that would be a location for you. Um,
but now that Bashar al-Assad has moved
to Moscow, it's unclear how that works.
But in any case, it's a useless base
because in wartime, no one gets through
the dinels. That place can be shut down
for um with mines. And the Ukrainians
have shown that you don't even need a
navy to stop a navy in narrow seas. It
should be a real wakeup call to anyone
on a narrow sea. That just by using
drones and uh shore shore ordinance and
planes and things that you can wreck
navies. And in fact, the Russian naval
base used to be at Sevastapole on
Crimea. Putin's had to move it to
Novais. Uh great. So he can't do too
much there. Have fun with that one. So
there are many fewer possibilities for
him nowadays. His second favorite liquid
playground is the Baltic. Khenrad is
sovereign Russian territory.
So back in the day, I guess if they
wanted to blockade the Baltic state,
they could try it. But after the latest
iteration of the Ukraine war, Sweden and
Finland have ditched neutrality. They're
part of NATO. Baltic states are also
NATO. So the Baltic is really a NATO
lake. There's not too much Putin can do
there. So his latest gig is cutting
undersseas cables. That's about where
he's at. I mean, look about trying to
leave the Baltic. It's uh it it doesn't
happen in wartime. You're stuck in
there. So it turns out that Putin,
Russia is much more vulnerable to
blockade than the other way around
because it's very easy to close up the
Baltic and Black seas. uh you look out
on what's going on and
they're they're hemmed in and it's all
way up north. Russia has two really big
naval bases, one on the Bearing Sea and
one in the Barren Sea. But the problem
is when they deploy out of those bases,
they have to go by NATO territory. So in
the Baron Sea, you can see why Greenland
and Iceland are so strategic because for
Russia to deploy, it's got to go in
between those places. And then on the
Bearing Sea, the more promising one for
Russia, it has to go by the United
States. And but the problem is how do
you supply the thing on the Bearing Sea?
It's just a long way from any industrial
base. So uh another part of Putin's sad
story has to do with NATO. So if you
look at NATO, you can look at his
accession in arcs. Initially in the cold
war, the early Cold War, it's all these
smaller European nations and everybody's
smaller than Russia. It's by far the
biggest country on the planet. and why
they need more territory remains a
mystery. But uh initially it's the
smaller places joining NATO to protect
themselves and then at the implosion of
the Soviet Union it's all its former
satellites fleeing at the first possible
moment and saying NATO NATO let me in.
And then uh with the Ukraine 2022
part of the Ukraine war Sweden and
Finland which long had preferred
neutrality said oh no no we're going to
join NATO. Now, the Russians look at
this and they go, "Well, this is NATO
coming at us in arcs. They're ignoring
their complicity in all of this. If you
occupy places and brutalize them for
generations,
uh, this is what you get." So, here is
um Putin's muse or I don't know if it's
his muse, but it's a guy who expresses a
lot of ideas like Putin's Alexander
Dugan. Here's his view of how the world
should be. It's not over a universal
rules-based order where we all trade
with each other. It's rather we're going
to divide it up into these spheres of
influence where each is a world into
itself. Dugan's worked it out for all of
us. Uh but here are the places that uh
Russia's actually taken lately. At the
end of the cold war, it took
Transnistria from Muldova. In 2008, it
took a south ofia from Georgia. And then
2014, uh, it's taking Crimea, Luhansk,
and Donets from Ukraine. And then look
how it really works. This is a
continental view. You want to color it
all in. That's what the 2022 invasion of
Ukraine is. It's the way a continental
power looks at territory. All right. The
United States thinks that Putin is just
all worried about us and NATO. Actually,
Putin's problem is China. NATO doesn't
want Russian territory. Who would want
it? It's full of Russians.
Stay at home. Please don't just don't
leave. But China might want. And also
Putin has said, you know, if you really
feel deeply about a place, forget about
boundary treaties. You should be able to
take it. Well, Zarus, Russia took a lot
of places from China that the Chinese
might feel deeply about that have
precisely the resources that China
needs. Not only energy and all those
sorts of things out in Siberia, but
water. Lake Bal holds 20% of the world's
surface freshwater and China's been
blowing through its water table in North
China. And that one I think the
topography works that you could do a
fairly uh you could pipe it all in. So
here's Putin dumping his ordinance on
Ukraine that never wanted to invade uh
while he's letting this problem
mishasticize. Oh, and speaking of the
problem, here he is. Um what are
Xiinping's possibility? You like the
little natty upgraded mouse suit? Here's
his world. Welcome to it. And what he's
got are 20 neighbors. 13 by land, seven
by sea, many of which despise China for
excellent reasons. Not all of them, but
some of them. And if you look at it,
it's all of these narrow seas. If
Xiinping wanted to blockade somebody, I
guess you could try Korea because you
got the Yellow Sea and then the Sea of
Japan. Except Japan sits out there.
That's a complicating factor. uh better
bets in the South China Sea because
Vietnam, Brunai, and Cambodia,
they don't have alternate coastlines. If
they want to reach the open oceans,
they've got to transit the South China
Sea. However,
Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, the
Philippines, Taiwan, all have other
coastlines
uh that face the high seas. And
remember, I've just given you a whole
discussion about the battle of the
Atlantic where um when people get the
have a high seas access, it's really
difficult to shut them down because
China would have to go all the way
around to be on the far side to shut
everything down on the other side. Or
maybe they're just going to obliterate
it. I don't know. But anyway, the South
China Sea is such a legal mess. No, no
one knows who owns what. And in any kind
of war, you're going to have all these
neutrals who might suddenly join sides
if they don't like what's happening. But
you can get a sense of what the
possibilities are there. It's very
difficult. Usually uh in a war, we've
already done narrow seas, right? The
North Sea, the Baltic, the Black Sea,
the Mediterranean, they shut down in
wartime to commercial traffic. It simply
can't make it through. And surface
fleets have great difficulty. And if the
neighbors, as Ukraine has shown, just
buy the right drones and uh since the
sea is a little bigger, buy some
submarines, uh some planes, shore
artillery, that might be enough to just
uh close down China's merchant marine.
Oh, certainly the merchant marine, but
also its navy. So, if you want to go the
other way of well, what about Xiinping
doing a surprise visit on the west
coast? There's a lot of open ocean.
Hawaii would be the nearest big island
and it's a long way away and Hawaii's
dependent on imports for everything.
It's not very useful. But for the United
States going the other way, the islands
get bigger and better the closer to
China that you get. So to leave you with
Alfred the Mahan, captain and later
admiral, by far the most famous person
ever associated with the US Naval War
College where I spent my career. Uh here
are his prerequisites for playing the
maritime game. One, you need a moat.
You've got to have insulation from
attack. If you want to play this game,
you need a dense internal transportation
grid to get the goods out in peace time,
reliable egress by sea, to get the navy
out in wartime, a dense coastal
population that's going to be running
all the trade, commerce-driven economy,
and then you need a government that's
stable that is going to support funding
a navy and supporting commerce. Okay,
let's line up Russia and China with
these prerequisites. Well, neither one's
got a moat. Uh they got more neighbors
than any other two other countries on
the planet. So definitely not that. Uh
internal transportation grid. Russia's
remains lamentable. China's is getting
better. Uh neither one has reliable
egress by sea with these narrow seas.
Sure, Russia's got the Arctic, but
there's nothing up there. I mean,
they're polar bears. Great. Get go get
bitten. Uh, and as for dense coastal
population, yes, China has a dense
coastal population, but Russia doesn't.
Way up north. Uh, Russia's never had a
commerce-driven economy. China was more
so under Dang Xiaoping, but under
Xiinping, he is privileging the crony
sector over the private sector. And
neither one has stable government
institutions. The litmus test of that
one is whether you have transparent,
regular transfers of power, usually
through elections. And dictator for life
does not remotely qualify. So sure,
China and Russia remain continental
problems, but I don't think they
understand the maritime limitations of
where they're at. And of course, peace
would be the better thing. Keep
compounding uh growth and war, as the
Ukrainian uh war shows uh daily. Uh what
a waste of Russian assets. But sadly,
the enemy gets a vote. All right, that's
what I had to say for you this evening
and thank you so much for coming and
being such a wonderful audience. Thank
you.
>> Okay, first question.
Um, the lecture is framed as explaining
Britain's
uh strategic wins in how they prosecuted
World War II. But if it seems like we
really have to explain um
what what seems to keep happening is
that Germany and Hitler specifically
keep making mistakes. So um 1940 1941
Halifax is saying look we need to come
to a peace with Germany. We've lost the
battle of France. We've had to evacuate
Durk and then Hitler could have done a
blockade of Britain and could have just
keep prosecuting the war. But instead he
decides to open up a second front
against the other biggest army in the
entire world against the Soviet Union.
And then when Japan does Pearl Harbor,
which again was a unforced error, he
makes another error on top of that of
declaring war on America, which he
didn't have to do and which made it much
easier for America to lend support
against the on the war against Germany.
So this seems much more about Hitler
continually bungling than about Britain
getting the strategic picture right.
It's both. Um, but I don't know that
Germany ever uh blockading Britain. It
was more he was planning to invade
Britain if he could. And then um he lost
so many naval assets during the Norway
campaign which he really needed to do.
Uh that he doesn't have the naval assets
that he had at the beginning of the war.
That's unlike World War I where the
Germans basically they had their whole
fleet most of it at the end of the war
and then it gets scuttled at the end of
the war. This time uh Germany did the
smart thing which is to use that fleet
gets something they get Norway but then
they don't have a fleet. So I don't
think invading um it's un it's
difficult. Uh and then I think because
he's in the big petroleum deficit zone
he's got to get moving. I don't I'm not
clear that he had tons of choices about
he's got to go for resources. Right. The
oceans have been shut off for him. Uh
the whole proposition of what he's up to
is questionable. Right. But it doesn't
mean that it isn't a really bitter
struggle and difficult. And even though
you go, well, Germany's GMP, if you add
it up compared to the totality allies
access, allies have so much more stuff.
Yeah, I mean, you can go I I think the
Allies are going to win this thing, but
after how many millions of losses, and I
showed you the Battle of the Atlantic,
it it goes this way, it goes that way,
it goes this way, it goes that way. A
lot of people are dying all all this. So
yeah, the Germans made errors. This
first one is why even go to war? If you
want to dominate Europe and you have a
really uh great uh growth rates, which
world war I did, uh they would have
taken over Europe years ago by just
growing right now. Don't don't do either
world war. Just keep growing your
economy and then you're going to have
all these good business relations. So,
uh, the the the ultim the era is even
going to war for these things, but it
doesn't mean these wars, uh, couldn't
have gone the other way. And you're
right, uh, you look at blunders, but you
call it a blender now because it didn't
work out at the time. You don't know,
right? A lot of people, uh, get away
with really, uh, risky things and then
you say they're brilliant and then the
ones who who don't get away with the
risky things, you say they're idiots.
But it's dicey.
>> But I want to come back to the question
of how much when we're trying to explain
who wins a big war like this, how much
should we be looking at the specific
strategies used in different battles
versus just the total tonnage of
industrial output that America
especially contributed. And so by 1942,
what is the way even if they had much
better strategy, what is the way in
which Germany would have won?
>> Define win, right? What what is would
win? If Germany's win means controlling
the entire continent plus Britain plus
Russia, you come up with one answer,
>> right? If Hitler had just done the
anloo, right? That's Austria joins and
maybe done the s Sudetan number which is
a large German population in
Czechoslovakia and quit, he'd be called
Bismar II a genius like no losses gets
to keep that bigger area. But that's not
who he is. So you need to define what
win is for both the Germans and then
both for the allies to determine what's
feasible and what's not feasible.
Germany is is potentially can be invaded
overland everywhere. Whereas Britain
can't. And then uh Germany just cannot
deploy a navy the way Britain can. It's
just geography. And therefore Germany
should have bought a completely
different navy. Skip the surface fleet.
Buy a lot more yubot. Maybe they would
have zapped uh the British before the
United States gets its act together in
either world war, right? Do it fast.
>> They didn't do it.
>> I I I found your thesis that Britain
fought this very effective maritime
strategy really interesting. But let me
just try out a different different
theory for you.
>> Counter argument. Here we go. Yes.
>> So, um after the fall of France in June
1940, Germany has all these Ubot and
they're actually themselves running a
very effective maritime strategy.
They're not in the Atlantic. They're not
in the narrow seas, right? They can
actually
>> go to the ocean and cut off British
trade through the Atlantic. Uh in
October, I think October of 1940, I
think they sink like close to 400 or
500,000 tons,
>> it's huge,
>> of um of British shipping. So, you know,
the Germans are running this like very
effective blockade of Britain. And the
reason it fails is just that the
Americans eventually can just produce
many more ships than the Germans can
even sink. And so ultimately it wasn't a
matter of who ran the better maritime
strategy. It was just that who could
keep up the industrial output to sustain
the strategy. So it it comes back to
industry and not strategy.
>> Uh
>> even even for these maritime operations.
I'm curious.
>> It's not they're not blockading Britain.
Britain's getting all it its stuff out,
but then they get sunk somewhere else.
Blockade is when you're actually keeping
things in. So Germany has exactly zero
merchant marine going anywhere, right?
The stuff that you're talking about
being sunk, mo, they're naval ships, but
a lot of it is merchant marine because
the British are getting things out.
Tremendous amounts of it are getting
out. So um that's just a difference. And
then uh you're correct about the
importance of productive bases.
Britain's problem in World War II.
That's different from the Napoleonic
Wars
uh is when you change to oil as what's
powering your your ships and things.
Britain doesn't have that at home.
Whereas coal, it does some A-list coal.
And so when you're doing age of sale and
coal, the British are okay. But then
when you're changing energy sources,
they're definitely not okay. So, uh,
there are other factors that are going
in with them, but you're right about the
productive base. But then there's
another game to play which I think is
worth playing. It's the game of
takeaway. So, you're telling me there's
this factor which is economic size and
it's decisive that this will determine
the outcome of wars. And you're
absolutely right that it's important.
Air power enthusiasts will say, "No, no,
no. That's nonsense. It's all about
controlling the skies." that when you
control the air and you got air cover
for your convoys that that's what do
does it. So let's talk about why the
battle of the Atlantic turns out the way
it is. Um if I take away uh cryptography
would it have turned out the same way?
Negative. Um if I take away not just
sheer amount of technology
um but certain key pieces like radar and
those things what happens? Does it
change? Yes, it does. Do uh what happens
if the United States just doesn't like
alliances that you don't coordinate
things part particularly well? Does it
change things? Yes, it does. You can go
through a list of this um of different
people are designing different types of
ships uh and are also determining that
you're going to share things with the
Britain. Britain's providing a lot of
free stuff. So if you play remove room
of any one of these things that battle
turns out differently. So the story is
um it's probably a package of many
things and this whole game of takeaway
um when you have people who will come up
with a monocausal explanation for you,
they'll go one cause and they'll
probably be right that their one cause
is really important but then they are
just ignoring all these other things. So
that's the more important thing in
strategy. So your thing is it's truly
important. Um I I guess the question
then is what does changing things mean?
Does it mean that the war could have
gone on longer, shorter, etc. Yes, of
course, anything would have changed
that. Then there's another question of
would it have changed who won the war?
And I'd claim that cryptography, radar,
even oil, even if like even if Germany
had a huge reserve of oil, maybe it
would have len lengthened the length at
which Germany could have sustained
itself. But um if you change the fact
that the Axis had 1/4 of the GDP of the
allies combined, I think that switching
that genuinely changes who wins the war.
Whereas these other things actually
wouldn't change who won the war.
>> Well, it depends whether the war is a
war for limited or unlimited objectives
because you can play that game with the
RussoJapanese war. Japan, all the data
you talk about Japan, it's a fraction of
Russia and Russia gets trounced in the
RussoJapanese war. So there's something
up uh what's going on. Whereas Japan's
having a very limited objective and
Russia has other problems at home and is
willing to bail. That's one thing. But
there's another thing. If Germany had
simply never bought a surface fleet if
they'd been sensible. Surface fleet,
yeah, it's great Britain's got one, but
it could always deploy that thing.
Germany will never deploy its surface
fleet. It'll get it sunk, which is what
happened in the Norwegian campaign. At
least they from the German point of
view, they got Norway Norway out of it.
Um, but if they had simply bought Ubot
instead, I don't know whether it would
have you'd have to do the math and I I
haven't done that of their what their
goal would need to be is uh to knock
Britain out before the United States
ever gets into the war. Oh, definitely
do not declare war on the United States
because maybe if you can keep the
commerce rating going for another six
months, maybe Britain falls. Maybe that
maybe that's the pivotal error. It has
nothing to do with what you're talking
about. It's simply Hitler shouldn't have
declared war. I don't know. But there
there are many factors that go into
these things and that's why it's it's a
reason why you should listen to people
who disagree with you that they may see
some of these other factors, right? Um
we all have blind spots and we rely on
other people to find them. But then you
have to be receptive to listening. M
>> when Germany and the Soviet Union split
up Poland, there's this just 2,000 km
border from the Baltics to the Black Sea
that they've signed themselves up for
for sharing with the other largest army
that has ever been assembled.
>> Did the Soviet Union think that
>> in the long run that this was a
sustainable proposition or did they just
think that we could um we could wait
Hitler out or in the long run, you know,
we we'd be in a better position to wage
war against him? Like did did people
think that this was a sustainable
arrangement?
>> Oh well I don't think Hitler was about
sustaining any arrangement. He was about
taking over Labour's realm in uh Slavic
in Slavic lands Russia. But flip it the
other way which is what the Soviet Union
is thinking is it'll be great when the
Germans go after the British. What's not
to like about that one? and then they
will um it's the pounce and absorb is
that they will so weaken each other that
will open opportunities for Russia. So
that would be the plan and then he's
looking at it and uh I don't know the
the details of what his timeline is on
whether he thinks it's just a delaying
act. Uh I have not gone into the
archives to read what Stalin was up to
>> uh in a great detail, but I think it's
basically that one is thinking that the
um the British and the Germans can go at
it. Also, the Russians had tried to be
working out some deal with the British
prior to all of this. And the British
are because the communists have been
trying to destabilize them ever since
the Bolevik Revolution. And they didn't
get just how lethal the fascists were in
Germany that they weren't just
run-of-the-mill authoritarians. They had
this whole genocide component that went
with them. And so the uh the British are
thinking, well, the real threat are the
communists in Russia. And they're right,
long term they are the real threat, but
in the u more medium-term it's the
Germans are. And so it takes um
blitzkrieg for the uh British to go
uhoh. And then they're willing to team
up with Russians.
>> Mhm.
>> And well, and Russia's willing to team
up with them, right? When when German
invasion transforms what had been
primary enemies, uh he he takes that
role being primary enemies for both
Britain and Russia, then you're going to
glue another alliance. So that's the
trick in our own day. You do not want to
do things that the United States is the
primary enemy of those two of Xiinping
and Putin. Currently we're not right.
It's Taiwan or India or Vietnam whatever
Xiinping's going to steal currently.
That's the way his primary problem. And
it's definitely Ukraine for Putin. And
you want to keep that all divided up to
the extent that you're able to do that.
Right. A lot of things aren't feasible.
These are high stakes things. But you
want do not want to this is where um
being really pro just not thinking about
your foreign policy takes a lot of
experts and a lot of people to guess
game out what is your best course of
action. What is your least bad option?
That's usually what foreign policy is.
It's not the what the great option is.
There are none of those. It's what the
least bad one is. And it takes a lot of
thought and gutting the state department
will not get you there. Yeah. It's just
it's profoundly dangerous.
>> Um you described Hitler's strategy as
pursuing a continental strategy and that
was sort of his undoing. Um but it seems
like there's many other wars where a
more reasonable person can pursue a
continental strategy and do just fine.
So Bismar uh does multiple continental
wars, Francoian War, Austroussian War,
and achieves his objectives. And Hitler
is just freaking crazy. like he
continuously does things. Um he knows
that going to war with Poland 1939
France and Britain will join. He's like
I I will fight both of them for Poland
for some reason.
>> Resources, big resources.
>> Somehow that works. Then he gets uh
somehow he France falls in a few weeks.
Instead of stopping there, he decides
now I'm going to go to war with the
whole of the Soviet Union. He decides
and in what way is it a continental
strategy to then declare war on America
which is an ocean away. It's not even an
adjacent continental power. So it seems
it just like him being crazy explains
more than him pursuing.
>> Let's talk about Bismar. Bismar did not
it this is the difference between
limited and unlimited objectives and
these concepts which I've tried to uh
transmit in these lectures I think are
useful and you apply them to other
things. So an unlimited objective means
the state in question is not going to
exist at the end of the war. And if it's
really unlimited and Hitler does the
most unlimited variant, he's going to
kill all the people. Like if it's Slavs,
he's going to literally butcher them
all. So that's one kind of war. A
limited war means you want maybe a hunk
of territory, something less. The
opposing government's going to live. So
Bismar runs three wars. One is the
Danish war, then there's the
Austropressian War, and then there's a
Francoressussian war. In the Danish war,
it's about a couple of provinces in the
far south of Denmark that uh Bismar
covetss because he wants to reunify well
unify for the first time all these
Germanic states. So for and he trounces
Denmark in that war. Does he go for
regime change in Copenhogen? No way. He
just says seed this place that you
shouldn't have had anyway because it's
got a bunch of Germans in it. And so if
you think about this is another concept,
value of the object. how much is victory
worth to you versus the other guy for
Denmark of just making Bismar go away
and this little state um the value of
the object's lower to them because they
aren't thinking in terms of creating a
greater Germany which Bismar is. So you
have two things going on. You're not you
you're giving the Danes given how much
the Prussians trounced them a generous
peace. You're saying just get rid of
this Germanic part that you don't really
much care about. So he gets away with
that one. Then in the Austrian the war
against Austria, he just slams them.
He's got this railway system that allows
them to deploy where the Austrians
can't. And there are all these little
Germanic states watching all this going
on and they're starting to confederate
sort of with Prussia um because they're
scared of all of this. And so um instead
of doing re regime change in Vienna,
it's just saying, "Hey, um let's seed a
few more of these things to Germany."
And it was a big empire where you have
pieces, you own pieces, you lose pieces.
You lose pieces, you own pieces. So for
the Austrians, the value big object
again is much lower. Given how they were
slammed in the war, it seems to be a
generous piece. And then when he gets
into the FrancoRussian
war, all these little Germanic states
are joining with um Prussia and that's
going to create unified Germany. And
then he takes a bite too far when he
takes als
totally upset about and becomes they
never give up on that one. But all of
these objectives are limited objectives.
He's not overthrowing the Danish
government, the Austrian government or
the French government. And the value for
Prussians of unifying the Germanic
states is far greater than the places
that are losing these itty bitty places.
Also, they don't get the big picture.
They don't see it till it's done that
whoops. Um, by doing all of this,
Prussia has transformed itself from the
weakest of the five great powers of
Europe to second only to Britain. And
that's expos. And it's a real reason why
you don't want royaltyr running stuff.
You want people who get their jobs based
on merit rather than who their dad was
because it's and the world that Bismar's
dealing with is kings who are just
clueless what they're up to.
>> I I interviewed last year Daniel Jorgen
who wrote this big history of oil
>> and he has like 300 pages in his book
about World War II
>> and specifically that his claim is
Barbara Rosa was motivated by Hitler's
desire to get the oil field. Yeah, he
needed it because he had this big
petroleum deficit zone. And so when you
say stupid to invade Russia, probably
it's once you've done this number, you
have to go into Russia because you've
got to take those oil fields. Then you
can go, buddy, don't go for Moscow.
Forget those people. Just go straight
for the oil fields. Take that only. That
would be that would be more of the
blender. H um is there any world in
which Hitler would have surrendered by
1943 when it was clear that the war was
going to go the other way?
>> Uh dictators don't they just double
down. This is the beauty of of
elections. I get it. It's a mess with a
multi- uh party system and with all the
crazy politics that come and go with it.
But elections are a moment to reassess
when the party in power sufficiently
screws things up where people finally
go, "Ooh, this is a mess." The
elections, the party in power isn't
reassessing, the election is reassessing
for them. You know, human beings, you
we've all met many um most human beings
don't like to change their mind. I think
it's a terrible mistake. And that's why
I like the argument as you know
counterargument structure to try to take
some of the sting out of changing our
minds cuz double down doubling down in
bad decisions. It's a mistake but we
human beings do it and then if you have
a dictator you're guaranteed Putin is
not going to dict is not going to uh
back down in Ukraine. Uh he's going to
be going after it from now until
doomsday and then if he wins there he's
going to then go after the Baltic
states. It's not going to end. So sadly
the enemy gets a vote and you may go
well these are idiot decisions. Yeah but
they're very dangerous ones so you have
to do things to counter them.
>> I mean in World War I you do have a lot
of powers which have at least some
amount of franchise. And in that war I
think people should have just it would
have been much better to lose the war in
1914 or 15 than to continue waging it
until 1917. But no even the democ even
Britain doesn't back down
>> or France doesn't back down. Well, the
problem in that war, this is another
thing that I think is really helpful to
do is to the best of your abilities,
write down primary adversary, secondary
adversary, tertiary adversary. So take
all the powers in World War I and u both
sides and do their primary enemy,
secondary, third, and you find out it is
a mess. Nothing aligns. So that if you
try to get out of that war, somebody's
not going to like it because that's
their primary objective. And there's a a
lot of um bad overlaps and who's going
to get whatever parts of the Balkans
they think at the end of this war. And
so in a way you have World War I um you
really have to sit down and look at it.
If I were doing a lecture on that, I
have a whole other slides that would
show you this where they're fighting
parallel wars. And
it's really not a good idea to either
have royalty running the show or World
War I is the war where militaries on all
sides are running the show and civilians
are doing the back seat saying, "Well, I
don't really understand military
operations. We're going to let you boys
do it." Disaster. That war sets
communism on fascism. it puts them on
steroids. And you can argue um we've
been dealing with that mismanagement in
one way or another ever since because uh
for most of my life I thought we had put
fascism back in its box and so we were
down to dealing with communism but now
it seems that uh this very authoritarian
vision which seems to rhyme with fascism
and then you can get a big argument what
what precisely is fascism and you try to
define it but it seems like we've come
full circle uh in the collective west
uh and it's um uh toxic in in in a way
uh dealing with all of this. So World
War I is the absolutely mismanaged war
and then the people who live through
that uh set up these institutions that
have held the peace until the present
day when uh irresponsible leaders across
the globe um are not cautious enough and
here we are. And then there's a price to
pay if you if there if you have a bunch
of reckless drivers on the road trying
to play chicken with each other uh how
this will all end. And I don't know the
answer.
>> So anyway, that's my reason for doing
lectures on strategy is I'm going to
give you uh concepts uh some data to
think about because you're going to have
to form your own opinions and your own
conclusions, but try to make it
evidence-based and think about things. I
recommend reading things more deeply.
Don't take what any one person has to
say. Come to your own terrors. That's
the reason for doing all this. We're
living in really portentious times where
uh people may make decisions where
there's no going back. I mean, if we
blow our alliance system, we're going to
be dealing with China alone. That won't
go well. Particularly if we think we're
going to corner them in some way, going
to go corner a great power like China
and think that'll go well for us. It
won't. M
>> the reason I brought up earlier the
primacy of uh industrial output and
population size in determining who wins
the warant is at the end you sort of
made the comparison that Russia and
China today are in a similar position as
the axis was preceding World War II or
at least the disadvantages that they
had.
>> No, I just tried maybe I wasn't clear. I
was just saying, okay, we we saw how it
all worked in World War II of people
blockading or not blockading or doing
peripheral operations or not. So if you
occupy Russia's position or China's
position, it's not about who's going to
win or who's going to lose. It's going,
well, both of them are much more
vulnerable to blockade. Period.
>> Right. Yeah. Then it depends. Well, do
you think that was more central than the
fact that during World War II, the
Allies just set three to five times the
combined output of uh the access. And so
today if you looked at the manufacturing
output of China versus the United
States, the ship building capacity of
China versus the United States,
>> even if you looked at the international
trade of China, like China has more
international trade than the United
States does.
>> Then you ask who is in a more similar
position to the United States during
World War II? Is it China or America?
>> More concepts. So I did limited
unlimited objectives and I did value of
the object. How much winning is worth to
you? Another one is what is when? So if
you're talking about the United States
invading China insane, who would ever do
that, right? If that's what if you're
thinking of whatever conflict you're
imagining. Um if you're thinking about I
don't know is when China I mean tell me
what this war is, who's going for what
and what's win going to look like and
then we can talk about what feasible is.
>> I mean the most likely thing would be a
war over Taiwan.
>> Okay. So your idea
>> the value of the object is clearly
higher to China there.
>> If you look at Taiwan, okay, maybe China
can take it. It would it may have to
leave it a glowing embers. That lovely
chip foundry that everyone cares about,
I imagine will be the first casualty of
that war. That will be blown and be
gone. There's no way you'll capture that
intact. Uh and then everybody else is
going to be terrified of this and
they're going to um do the it's not
blade in our day the it's rather
sanctions of saying okay if you're not
going to play nice we're not going to
trade with you uh go you're going to
have a massive timeout from the global
order and China is very trade reliant
and so okay uh
>> it's precisely because it has such a
dominant position in trade that it would
be difficult to coordinate a coalition
against them. If the entire world
benefits more from trading with them,
the United States, which is there's more
volume of trade with China than the
United States globally, then it would be
difficult to coordinate a coalition to
say, "Look, you got to stop trading with
the person you're trading most."
>> I think the story is on um sanctions.
They don't have to be leak proof. All
you're doing is uh if you can knock off
one or two percentages of points of
Chinese growth just because some people
are sanctioning like war material, that
would be a very likely thing that after
Taiwan, maybe you're trading with China,
but you're not doing certain categories
of war material with them.
The cumulative effects of doing that to
a country over generations is the
difference between North and South
Korea. It it adds right up. And you can
do the math better than I can of if you
knock off 2% growth per animal, uh I
think the the doubling time of an
economy, I don't know if you knock a
couple of percentage points off, it goes
from like 25 years to 75 years. You you
you will be able to do the math better
than I can rapidly, but it's very
consequential. And China's neighbors
will be scared to death of this. And
also, you're you're right that trade
patterns don't go overnight. they go
gradually over like a 10-year period or
in which China will find it's already
happening is supply chains are moving
out of China.
>> Yeah.
>> Slow. I guess a larger thing I'm trying
to um uh get at is in the immediate term
it seems like if the thing that mattered
in World War II was the fact that the
United States was outproducing all the
axis combined in planes and munitions
and uh tanks and then who is in a
comparable position today? you'd say is
China and then over the long run perhaps
we can collaborate together coalition
which over many generations reduces
China's growth or ability to compete but
then I'm not even confident that the
coalition would you know center around
the United States rather than China not
today no one's centering around us right
now because we're not playing nicely
with allies right now um but rather um I
think you will find that there are so
many countries that are eager to follow
the Chinese model for development. They
have cheaper labor now places like
Vietnam and uh India has also been doing
all sorts of things and my impression
with India is it's one of India's
problems. It needs a better
infrastructure and there are investments
going on in that. So there are many
other people in the world who are
interested in making money and they've
watched how China did it. You can em
emulate that. So, I think if Taiwan,
China is foolish enough to do Taiwan,
uh, these will be the long-term
ramifications. It's a mistake. Um, as
annoying as other countries are, it's
better to just argue with them at
international institutions. And China
has a big presence at these
international institutions and should be
able to get others to go along with
however it wants to change rules
>> and do it that way. If they're going to
do it the uh the Putin way, you can look
at it. It's negative sum and they will
get a timeout from the global order.
Ever since the industrial revolution
introduced compounded economic growth,
this continental solution is a mistake.
It is much better. Forget about invading
territory. Uh allow the free traffic p
of people, trade, goods, ideas, and then
we'll all grow together. M um on the
general framework of how should
continental powers act and how should
maritime powers act. I I wonder if it's
worth even designating the optimal
strategy based on your geography versus
to the extent that you think positive
some trade is better than invading and
doing bloody wars. That's true.
Regardless of whether we have a maritime
or oh um the continental maritime I've
just discussed geography because it's
something I think most people don't
think about.
>> Um and so and particularly what's
hilarious about people who buy navies
and I've read all these I've sadly had
to read these naval theory books. They
never look at the geography. I mean they
occasionally do but it's sort of I'm
going to get a big navy. Well it depends
where you live. So, I've just finished
and edited books about fleets and being
just like if you have a fleet, what does
that foreclose for whoever's around you?
What does it open for you? And then it
makes really it's it's not a great read,
but I learn a lot from doing it. Um, of
becomes really clear that uh like oh,
you can see that map there, you see
Italy. Um,
and you have in World War I with that
particular position, the AustroHungarian
Empire has a quite a good little
submarine fleet. Captain Font Trap, you
know, Sound of Music. He was a war hero.
He was a submarine captain. And just by
having that submarine fleet in there, it
forced Britain to convoy the whole
Mediterranean. doesn't mean Auststerh
Hungary lives wins the war but a very uh
simple investment pre prevents anyone
from invading o over its oceans which is
important and it wrecks uh British makes
British do very expensive convoy duty
because captain von trap is quite good
at sinking naval ships of the British so
it's that's the difference of your your
geographic position uh limits what you
can do but now we have a whole
rulesbased order so that if you join the
party uh you have a a massive alliance
system that's why I look at China it
doesn't have any allies it has itself
and it likes to have bilateral relations
but actually these international uh
institutions for th those who who
actually are serious about them it's a
de facto uh NATO is most certainly an
alliance
>> I mean if you are the biggest trading
partner with say a 100 countries do you
have a lot of alliances I mean if not
then that seems more significant
than just calling yourself an ally. You
just have an incredibly strong vested
interest in the other country. I mean,
the reason America has a lot of
alliances is because we have a lot of
trade.
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's important.
It's just um the Chinese also come with
this little piece of baggage that we're
big, you're small, so we get to tell you
what to do. There's this
>> is that true though? I mean, like what
is it they actually tell
>> Oh, they've literally said it over and
over again. They'll tell it to their
neighbors like the Vietnamese. Just
basically shut up and color because
we're a big country and you're little.
Vietnamese don't like it.
>> Yeah. I mean, one thing I often hear in
these discussions is that uh it's the
United States which actually has a
stronger preferences and for example,
how your political system works, which
may be reasonable to have, but China is
usually more willing to just trade with
you if you're willing to trade.
>> Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We've been uh
really in intrusive in other people's
domestic politics without a doubt.
Right.
>> And that is the the American busy body
gene that's gotten us into a lot of
trouble.
So, Oh, yeah. No one's perfect in this
world. Far from it. We all make
horrendous errors and then do things we
shouldn't do.
>> I think that's a nice place to close.
>> Sarah, thanks so much.
>> Thank you.
>> I hope you enjoyed this episode. If you
did, the most helpful thing you can do
is just share it with other people who
you think might enjoy it. Send it to
your friends, your group chats, Twitter,
wherever else. Just let the word go
forth. Other than that, super helpful if
you can subscribe on YouTube and leave a
fivestar review on Apple Podcast and
Spotify. Check out the sponsors in the
description below. If you want to
sponsor a future episode, go to
dwarcash.com/advertise.
[Music]
Thank you for tuning in. I'll see you on
the next one.